conformity
correspondence in form, type, or appearance
This experiment tests conformity and whether or not a person will say something incorrect simply because everyone else is.
debrief
elicit a report from someone about a mission, job, or event
I can now debrief you on what has been going on.
conform
be similar, be in line with
In the original Asch experiments first carried out by Solomon Asch in 1951, approximately 75% of subjects conformed at least once.
euphoria
a feeling of great elation
You may see some images behind your eyes-- um, you know, some general feelings of either calmness or euphoria.
dissonance
disagreeable sounds
- That process of mental gymnastics is known as cognitive dissonance.
distortion
a shape resulting from being deformed
You know, there've been some audio-visual distortions.
psychological
mental or emotional as opposed to physical in nature
No, the answer is, we paid them to lie. [electronic music] ♪ ♪ Today, we are going to be demonstrating a very famous psychological experiment known as the "Asch experiment."
nonsensical
having no intelligible meaning
Will they repeat the nonsensical joke to another one of our actors?
theorize
construct a hypothesis about
Well, it's theorized that the police commissioner actually lied to a reporter about the number of witnesses who did nothing in order to cover up why it took the police so long to arrive at the scene of the crime.
cascade
a small waterfall or series of small waterfalls
As more and more sources repeated reports they'd heard, rather than going back to investigate the truth, a psychological phenomenon known as information cascade took place.
eyewitness
a spectator who can describe what happened
So the conformity wasn't on the part of the eyewitnesses.
kaleidoscope
an optical toy in a tube
- It's almost like I'm looking through a kaleidoscope, but it's, like, fuzzy.
cognitive
relating to or involving the mental process of knowing
- That process of mental gymnastics is known as cognitive dissonance.
sitcom
a humorous drama based on day-to-day situations
- Laughter can be a powerful tool for social conformity, which is exactly why sitcoms use canned laughter.
inaudible
impossible to hear; imperceptible by the ear
Good. [ inaudible] - I guess the joke has to wait.
hilarious
marked by boisterous merriment or convulsive laughter
Let's see what happens when there's even more pressure to see something that's unfunny as hilarious.
somber
grave or even gloomy in character
And Kitty died. [ somber music] But here's the thing: Kitty's story may not be an example of conformity, at least not in the way we normally think, because most of it was totally untrue.
bystander
a spectator who does not participate in some event
- It's definitely a-- a conformity thing. [laughter] - One of the most disappointing and terrifying aspects of our desire not to stand out is the bystander effect.
prank
a ludicrous or grotesque act done for fun and amusement
Classical psychological experiments and hidden camera pranks often involve people acting together in strange ways to see if others will conform.
symptom
a sensation associated with a particular disease
- Emma continues to look to the group for reassurance that her symptoms are in line with theirs.
lava
rock that in its molten form issues from volcanos
- It's like a--like a lava lamp sort of thing.
entice
provoke someone to do something through persuasion
- Uncle Jake, if there was a pretty girl on the other side of this house, I'd jump clean over it. [laughter] - The laugh track entices you at home to laugh along, even when a joke might not be that funny.
individuality
the quality of being a single thing or person
And the dueling forces pushing us to conform and also to express our individuality are both necessary.
approximately
imprecise but fairly close to correct
In the original Asch experiments first carried out by Solomon Asch in 1951, approximately 75% of subjects conformed at least once.
prone
having a tendency
- I am prone to anxiety attacks, though, so I felt relaxed.
imminent
close in time; about to occur
I mean, what it costs for me to look up is really low compared to the potential harm that might come from me not seeing an imminent threat.
inference
drawing a conclusion on the basis of circumstantial evidence
An information cascade develops when people have little information themselves, so they depend on inferences they can make based on earlier people's actions.
denial
renunciation of one's own interests in favor of others
When you've done something you don't truly believe in, like laughing just because everyone else did, you try to come to terms with your behavior through denial and justification.
manifestation
a clear appearance
Our subject is actually experiencing physical manifestations due to group pressure.
hypothesis
a tentative insight that is not yet verified or tested
- The hypothesis was that each and every one of them assumed someone else would call the police, so they didn't have to bother to do so themselves.
scared
made afraid
- If everyone else is participating willingly, it must be okay for her, too. [laughter] - We're all, like, scared to death.
mood
a characteristic state of feeling
It's important that everyone be kind of in a chatty mood.
witness
someone who sees an event and reports what happened
38 people didn't witness the attack.
upbeat
pleasantly optimistic and cheerful
- All right, thank you very much. [ upbeat synth music] ♪ ♪ People follow the crowd in all kinds of interesting ways, many of which are pretty funny.
enlighten
give spiritual insight to
- Clinical trials: they can be enlightening, frightening, dangerous...
manifest
clearly revealed to the mind or the senses or judgment
- What we're seeing from these subjects could be a form of informational conformity, or even what's called a contact high, a psychological phenomenon that occurs when a sober person comes into contact with someone who is under the influence of drugs and begins to manifest the same physical symptoms.
acute
ending in a sharp point
- Yeah, acute audio distortion is really common.
alleged
doubtful or suspect
Will she go along with the group when she sees the actors pretend to experience an auditory reaction to the alleged drug?
brutal
resembling a beast; showing lack of human sensibility
It's the story of Kitty Genovese, a woman who was brutally stabbed and raped in New York City in 1964.
awkward
lacking grace or skill in manner or movement or performance
Instead, you're just going with the flow and not being awkward.
narrative
an account that tells the particulars of an act or event
And the narrative of uncaring New Yorkers turning a blind eye to a woman's murder spread around the world, making front page headlines.
commissioner
a member of a special group considering some matter
Well, it's theorized that the police commissioner actually lied to a reporter about the number of witnesses who did nothing in order to cover up why it took the police so long to arrive at the scene of the crime.
journalism
the profession of reporting or editing news stories
There's a saying in journalism: "Some stories are too good to check." [projector whirring] - I'm going to give you this cup that contains lysergic acid-- 100 micrograms.
peer
look searchingly
Peer pressure.