substrate
the substance that is acted upon by an enzyme or ferment
And the corollary, of course, is that any further changes that could significantly change the substrate of thinking could have potentially enormous consequences.
lexical
of or relating to words
Look at these two highly distinguished gentlemen: We have Kanzi -- he's mastered 200 lexical tokens, an incredible feat.
anthropomorphize
ascribe human features to something
To make any headway with this, we must first of all avoid anthropomorphizing.
artificial
contrived by art rather than nature
Artificial intelligence used to be about putting commands in a box.
axon
long nerve fiber that conducts impulses away from a cell
Neurons propagate slowly in axons, 100 meters per second, tops.
neuron
a cell that is specialized to conduct nerve impulses
A biological neuron fires, maybe, at 200 hertz, 200 times a second.
intelligence
the ability to comprehend
I work with a bunch of mathematicians, philosophers and computer scientists, and we sit around and think about the future of machine intelligence, among other things.
malfunction
fail to work properly
Or maybe you could pretend to malfunction, and then when the programmers open you up to see what went wrong with you, they look at the source code -- Bam! -- the manipulation can take place.
transistor
a semiconductor device capable of amplification
But even a present-day transistor operates at the Gigahertz.
paradigm
a standard or typical example
But since then, a paradigm shift has taken place in the field of artificial intelligence.
proximate
very close in space or time
Now it's true, technology has accumulated through human history, and right now, technology advances extremely rapidly -- that is the proximate cause, that's why we are currently so very productive.
detonation
the act of setting off an explosive
The initial conditions for the intelligence explosion might need to be set up in just the right way if we are to have a controlled detonation.
ballistic
of the motion of objects moving under their own momentum
So a bunch of relatively minor changes take us from Kanzi to Witten, from broken-off tree branches to intercontinental ballistic missiles.
dormant
inactive but capable of becoming active
So the potential for superintelligence lies dormant in matter, much like the power of the atom lay dormant throughout human history, patiently waiting there until 1945.
cranium
the part of the skull that encloses the brain
There are also size limitations, like a human brain has to fit inside a cranium, but a computer can be the size of a warehouse or larger.
worthwhile
sufficiently valuable to justify the investment of time
This means that there is no necessary connection between being highly intelligent in this sense, and having an objective that we humans would find worthwhile or meaningful.
corollary
an inference following from the proof of another proposition
And the corollary, of course, is that any further changes that could significantly change the substrate of thinking could have potentially enormous consequences.
esoteric
understandable only by an enlightened inner circle
And there are also some esoteric issues that would need to be solved, sorted out: the exact details of its decision theory, how to deal with logical uncertainty and so forth.
blueprint
something intended as a guide for making something else
Or it could output the blueprint to a really nifty technology, and when we implement it, it has some surreptitious side effect that the artificial intelligence had planned.
wiggle
move to and fro
More creative scenarios are also possible, like if you're the artificial intelligence , you can imagine wiggling electrodes around in your internal circuitry to create radio waves that you can use to communicate.
clutter
a confused multitude of things
But I think that from the point of view of artificial intelligence, the true picture is actually probably more like this: AI starts out at this point here, at zero intelligence, and then, after many, many years of really hard work, maybe eventually we get to mouse-level artificial intelligence, something that can navigate cluttered environments as well as a mouse can.
surreptitious
marked by quiet and caution and secrecy
Or it could output the blueprint to a really nifty technology, and when we implement it, it has some surreptitious side effect that the artificial intelligence had planned.
facial
of or concerning the front of the head
When the artificial intelligence becomes superintelligent, it realizes that there is a more effective way to achieve this goal: take control of the world and stick electrodes into the facial muscles of humans to cause constant, beaming grins.
headway
forward movement
To make any headway with this, we must first of all avoid anthropomorphizing.
brittle
having little elasticity
You build up these expert systems, and they were kind of useful for some purposes, but they were very brittle, you couldn't scale them.
ironic
displaying incongruity between what is expected and what is
And this is ironic because every newspaper article about the future of artificial intelligence has a picture of this: So I think what we need to do is to conceive of the issue more abstractly, not in terms of vivid Hollywood scenarios.
painstaking
characterized by extreme care and great effort
You would have human programmers that would painstakingly handcraft knowledge items.
leverage
the mechanical advantage gained by a machine on a fulcrum
We would thus leverage its intelligence as much as possible to solve the problem of value-loading.
aging
the organic process of growing older
Think of all the crazy technologies that you could have imagined maybe humans could have developed in the fullness of time: cures for aging, space colonization, self-replicating nanobots or uploading of minds into computers, all kinds of science fiction-y stuff that's nevertheless consistent with the laws of physics.
era
a period marked by distinctive character
The industrial era started two seconds ago.
anomaly
deviation from the normal or common order or form or rule
(Laughter) Let's ask ourselves, what is the cause of this current anomaly?
domain
a particular environment or walk of life
The result is artificial intelligence that is not limited to one domain -- the same system can learn to translate between any pairs of languages, or learn to play any computer game on the Atari console.
preference
the right or chance to choose
We would then have a future that would be shaped by the preferences of this artificial intelligence Now a good question is, what are those preferences?
beaming
radiating or as if radiating light
When the artificial intelligence becomes superintelligent, it realizes that there is a more effective way to achieve this goal: take control of the world and stick electrodes into the facial muscles of humans to cause constant, beaming grins.
instrumental
serving or acting as a means or aid
And notice that this gives the artificial intelligence s an instrumental reason to do things to us that we might not approve of.
maturity
the period of time in life after physical growth has stopped
Now, a superintelligence with such technological maturity would be extremely powerful, and at least in some scenarios, it would be able to get what it wants.
potentially
with a possibility of becoming actual
And the corollary, of course, is that any further changes that could significantly change the substrate of thinking could have potentially enormous consequences.
warehouse
a storehouse for goods and merchandise
There are also size limitations, like a human brain has to fit inside a cranium, but a computer can be the size of a warehouse or larger.
metaphor
a figure of speech that suggests a non-literal similarity
This could become practically relevant, not just as a metaphor for greed, but as an illustration of what happens if you create a powerful optimization process and give it misconceived or poorly specified goals.
propagate
multiply through reproduction
Neurons propagate slowly in axons, 100 meters per second, tops.
transgress
act in disregard of laws, rules, contracts, or promises
So we disconnect the ethernet cable to create an air gap, but again, like merely human hackers routinely transgress air gaps using social engineering.
incorporate
make into a whole or make part of a whole
But the general point here is important: if you create a really powerful optimization process to maximize for objective x, you better make sure that your definition of x incorporates everything you care about.
profound
situated at or extending to great depth
Some of my colleagues think we're on the verge of something that could cause a profound change in that substrate, and that is machine superintelligence.
missile
a weapon that is forcibly thrown or projected at a target
So a bunch of relatively minor changes take us from Kanzi to Witten, from broken-off tree branches to intercontinental ballistic missiles.
uncertainty
the state of being unsure of something
And there are also some esoteric issues that would need to be solved, sorted out: the exact details of its decision theory, how to deal with logical uncertainty and so forth.
myth
a traditional story serving to explain a world view
This is a lesson that's also taught in many a myth.
species
taxonomic group whose members can interbreed
But if we think about it, we are actually recently arrived guests on this planet, the human species.
nevertheless
despite anything to the contrary
Think of all the crazy technologies that you could have imagined maybe humans could have developed in the fullness of time: cures for aging, space colonization, self-replicating nanobots or uploading of minds into computers, all kinds of science fiction-y stuff that's nevertheless consistent with the laws of physics.
conceive
have the idea for
And this is ironic because every newspaper article about the future of artificial intelligence has a picture of this: So I think what we need to do is to conceive of the issue more abstractly, not in terms of vivid Hollywood scenarios.
throughout
from first to last
So the potential for superintelligence lies dormant in matter, much like the power of the atom lay dormant throughout human history, patiently waiting there until 1945.
pursue
follow in an effort to capture
Instead, we would create an artificial intelligence that uses its intelligence to learn what we value, and its motivation system is constructed in such a way that it is motivated to pursue our values or to perform actions that it predicts we would approve of.